FIX/API Fix AIC/BIC in LassoLarsIC and introduce noise_variance (#21481)
scikit-learn/scikit-learn: doc/modules/linear_model.rst

and a multiplicative factor.

At last, we mentioned above that :math:`\sigma^2` is an estimate of the
noise variance. In :class:`LassoLarsIC` when the parameter `noise_variance` is
not provided (default), the noise variance is estimated via the unbiased
estimator [13]_ defined as:

.. math::
    \sigma^2 = \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{y}_i)^2}{n - p}

where :math:`p` is the number of features and :math:`\hat{y}_i` is the
predicted target using an ordinary least squares regression. Note, that this
formula is valid only when `n_samples > n_features`.

.. topic:: Examples:

  * :ref:`sphx_glr_auto_examples_linear_model_plot_lasso_model_selection.py`
  * :ref:`sphx_glr_auto_examples_linear_model_plot_lasso_lars_ic.py`

.. topic:: References

  .. [12] `Zou, Hui, Trevor Hastie, and Robert Tibshirani.
           "On the degrees of freedom of the lasso."
           The Annals of Statistics 35.5 (2007): 2173-2192.
           <https://arxiv.org/pdf/0712.0881.pdf>`_

  .. [13] `Cherkassky, Vladimir, and Yunqian Ma.
           "Comparison of model selection for regression."
           Neural computation 15.7 (2003): 1691-1714.

>            <https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.392.8794&rep=rep1&type=pdf>`_

Author: the doi will not give free access to this article. I keep it as is.

>            <https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.392.8794&rep=rep1&type=pdf>`_

Reviewer: Could we then at least use `:arxiv:` for the first reference?

>            <https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.392.8794&rep=rep1&type=pdf>`_

Author: I did add all the arxiv already

>            <https://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.392.8794&rep=rep1&type=pdf>`_

Reviewer: Sorry for the noise then.

They also tend to break when the problem is badly conditioned
(more features than samples).

.. figure:: ../auto_examples/linear_model/images/sphx_glr_plot_lasso_lars_ic_001.png
    :target: ../auto_examples/linear_model/plot_lasso_lars_ic.html
    :align: center
    :scale: 50%

Mathematical details
""""""""""""""""""""

The definition of AIC (and thus BIC) might differ in the literature. In this
section, we give more information regarding the criterion computed in
scikit-learn. The AIC criterion is defined as:

.. math::

>     AIC = -2 \ln(\hat{L}) + 2 d

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    AIC = -2 \log(\hat{L}) + 2 d
```

today's standard in ML papers is to use \log.

where :math:`\hat{L}` is the maximum likelihood of the model and

> :math:`d` is the number of parameters (as well referred as degrees of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:math:`d` is the number of parameters (as well referred to as degrees of
```

freedom in the previous section).

For a linear Gaussian model, the maximum log-likelihood is defined as:

.. math::

>     \ln(\hat{L}) = - \frac{n}{2} \ln(2 \pi) - \frac{n}{2} \ln(\hat{\sigma^2}) - \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{y_i})^2}{2\hat{\sigma^2}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    \log(\hat{L}) = - \frac{n}{2} \log(2 \pi) - \frac{n}{2} \ln(\hat{\sigma}^2) - \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{y_i})^2}{2\hat{\sigma}^2}
```

> where :math:`\hat{\sigma^2}` is an estimator of the noise variance,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where :math:`\hat{\sigma}^2` is an estimate of the noise variance,
```

:math:`y_i` and :math:`\hat{y_i}` are respectively the true and predicted
targets, and :math:`n` is the number of samples.

Plugging the maximum log-likelihood in the AIC formula yields:

.. math::

>     AIC = n \ln(2 \pi \hat{\sigma^2}) + \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{y_i})^2}{\hat{\sigma^2}} + 2d

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    AIC = n \log(2 \pi \hat{\sigma}^2) + \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{y_i})^2}{\hat{\sigma}^2} + 2d
```

> The left-hand term of the above expression is sometimes discarded since it is a
> constant and does not change the rank of the models evaluated. In addition,
> it is sometimes stated that the AIC is equivalent to the :math:`C_p` statistic
> [12]_. However, this is important to note that it is up to some constant
> and factor term.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first term of the above expression is sometimes discarded since it is a
constant when :math:`\hat{\sigma}^2` is provided. In addition,
it is sometimes stated that the AIC is equivalent to the :math:`C_p` statistic
[12]_. However, this is important to note that it is up to some constant
and factor term.
```

this last sentence is mysterious without a reference

> At last, we mentioned above that :math:`\hat{\sigma^2}` is an estimator of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At last, we mentioned above that :math:`\hat{\sigma}^2` is an estimate of the
```

noise variance. In :class:`LassoLarsIC` when the parameter `noise_variance` is
not provided (default), the noise variance is estimated via the unbiased
estimator [13]_ defined as:

.. math::
    \hat{\sigma^2} = \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{y_i})^2}{n - p}

> where :math:`p` is the number of parameters in the model and :math:`\hat{y_i}`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where :math:`p` is the number of features and :math:`\hat{y_i}`
```

is the predicted target using an ordinary least squares regression. In

> scikit-learn, we used a ridge model with a very small regularization in case

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scikit-learn, we use a ridge model with a very small regularization in case
```
```suggestion
scikit-learn, we used a ridge model with a very small regularization in case
```

> of ill-conditioned design matrix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of ill-conditioned design matrix. Note, that this formula is valid only when
`n_samples > n_features`.
```

They also tend to break when the problem is badly conditioned
(more features than samples).

.. figure:: ../auto_examples/linear_model/images/sphx_glr_plot_lasso_lars_ic_001.png
    :target: ../auto_examples/linear_model/plot_lasso_lars_ic.html
    :align: center
    :scale: 50%

Mathematical details

> """"""""""""""""""""

Reviewer: This renders as `1.1.3.1.2.1. Mathematical details`. Could we skip the chapter numbering here?

The definition of AIC (and thus BIC) might differ in the literature. In this
section, we give more information regarding the criterion computed in

> scikit-learn. The AIC criterion is defined as:

Reviewer: Are we sure, all our instances of AIC and BIC follow this convention?

Author: AIC/BIC are used in lasso and Gaussian mixture.
The AIC in `GaussianMixture` is defined as:

```
return -2 * self.score(X) * X.shape[0] + 2 * self._n_parameters()
```

which is this definition.

Reviewer: Reassuring;-)
Should we then link to this section in the user guide of `GaussianMixture`?

Reviewer: As long as we write `\hat{y}` instead of `X\hat{coef}`, the formulation is quite general.

.. math::
    AIC = -2 \log(\hat{L}) + 2 d

where :math:`\hat{L}` is the maximum likelihood of the model and
:math:`d` is the number of parameters (as well referred to as degrees of
freedom in the previous section).

For a linear Gaussian model, the maximum log-likelihood is defined as:

.. math::

>     \log(\hat{L}) = - \frac{n}{2} \log(2 \pi) - \frac{n}{2} \ln(\hat{\sigma}^2) - \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{y_i})^2}{2\hat{\sigma}^2}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \log(\hat{L}) = - \frac{n}{2} \log(2 \pi) - \frac{n}{2} \ln(\hat{\sigma}^2) - \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{y}_i)^2}{2\hat{\sigma}^2}
```
Should we write `\log(\hat{L}) = \min{\theta} - \frac{n}{2} \log(2 \pi) ..` to make it clear that the yhat is the one found by minimizing this likelihood, i.e. the unpenalized one? I think this is an important point. For instance, for linear models, all the yhats in this subsubsubsubsection are `X\hat{\beta}` with `\hat{\beta}` the OLS estimates.

In addition, I would use `\sigma` instead of `\hat{\sigma}`. It does't change the yhat, but is generally more correct.

Last point: This holds **in-sample** only. We could mention that above as advantage: We don't need a test set for AIC/BIC.

Author: > In addition, I would use \sigma instead of \hat{\sigma}. It does't change the yhat, but is generally more correct.

using `\sigma` does not make it obvious that this is an estimation, isn't it? The

> We don't need a test set for AIC/BIC.

I recall having mentioned it somewhere, maybe the new example?

Author: I improve the documentation for the last point regarding the criterion computation in-sample.

Reviewer: > Using \sigma does not make it obvious that this is an estimation, isn't it?

Strictly speaking, MLE of a (linear) Gaussian model does not (need to) estimate sigma. We need sigma for AIC and don't even use the MLE estimate of it, but the Bessel corrected, unbiased estimated of sigma^2. Therefore, I would prefer to write `\sigma` instead of `\hat{\sigma}` in this case.

where :math:`\hat{\sigma}^2` is an estimate of the noise variance,
:math:`y_i` and :math:`\hat{y_i}` are respectively the true and predicted
targets, and :math:`n` is the number of samples.

Plugging the maximum log-likelihood in the AIC formula yields:

.. math::

>     AIC = n \log(2 \pi \hat{\sigma}^2) + \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{y_i})^2}{\hat{\sigma}^2} + 2d

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    AIC = n \log(2 \pi \hat{\sigma}^2) + \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{y}_i)^2}{\hat{\sigma}^2} + 2d
```

The first term of the above expression is sometimes discarded since it is a
constant when :math:`\hat{\sigma}^2` is provided. In addition,
it is sometimes stated that the AIC is equivalent to the :math:`C_p` statistic

> [12]_. However, this is important to note that it is up to some constant
> and factor term.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[12]_. In a strict sense, however, it is equivalent only up to some constant
and a multiplicative factor.
```

At last, we mentioned above that :math:`\hat{\sigma}^2` is an estimate of the
noise variance. In :class:`LassoLarsIC` when the parameter `noise_variance` is
not provided (default), the noise variance is estimated via the unbiased
estimator [13]_ defined as:

.. math::
    \hat{\sigma^2} = \frac{\sum_{i=1}^{n} (y_i - \hat{y_i})^2}{n - p}

where :math:`p` is the number of features and :math:`\hat{y_i}`
is the predicted target using an ordinary least squares regression. In
scikit-learn, we use a ridge model with a very small regularization in case
of ill-conditioned design matrix. Note, that this formula is valid only when

> `n_samples > n_features`.

Reviewer: Are you sure, using Ridge is fine? Could you test that for one case?
https://arxiv.org/pdf/0712.0881.pdf Theorem 1 states that results are valid only if `X` is full rank (dummy vs one-hot encoding).

Author: The safeguard to use an OLS is to check the rank of the matrix before computing the `dof` then?

Reviewer 3: Let's try with plain `LinearRegression`. The coef will be numerically unstable but the estimated variance based on its in-sample predictions should be fine.

We just need to make sure to include tests in with `n_samples ~= n_features` and many collinear features to check that either the results are ok without error messages or that the error messages (if any) make sense.

Reviewer: I'm not saying that ridge is false. I'm just asking as the papers do not mention it and use plain OLS. I've no intuition if it's fine in this context.
